---
title: "Ian's Eggnog"
description: "Best ever homemade Eggnog."
layout: recipe
date: 2016-12-14
version: 1.0
fbcomments: yes
---

This is a recipe I've been making for a few years. It's still a work in progress but people have been asking me for it so here it is. Give me feedback and I will try to improve this recipe. Past versions will be available here.

You need a thermometer for this recipe, preferably a candy thermometer. Unless someone has a trick for telling when milk reaches 160 degrees fahrenheit.

Both alcoholic and non alcoholic versions are possible. However, the non-alcoholic version needs to be served within a couple days of making.

## Ingredients

### The base
- 4 cups milk
- 1 vanilla bean split (or 2 tbsp vanilla extract)
- 2 sticks cinnamon (or 2 tsp ground cinnamon)
- 1/2 tsp nutmeg
- 4 whole cloves (1/4 tsp ground cloves)
- 1/4 tsp salt

- 12 large eggs yolks (reserve the whites)
- 1 1/2 cups granulated sugar

- 2 cups of whisky, dark rum, brandy, or sherry (I like 1/2 whisky, and 1/2 dark rum)
- 2 cups whipping cream

### To serve
- 12 reserved egg whites
- 2 cups whipping cream
- 1 tsp Freshly grated nutmeg

## Instructions

### The base
- Heat **4 cups milk**, **4 cloves**, **1 vanilla bean**, **1/2 tsp nutmeg**, and **2 sticks cinnamon** over low heat until it reaches 160 F. Stir often. Turn off heat and cover to let steep.
- [Separate yoke from whites][1] and set aside whites. Freeze whites if preparing final mixture more than a few days from now.
- In mixer, whisk 12 egg yolks until light yellow. Slowly add 1 1/2 cup of sugar.
- [Temper][2] milk mixture into eggs then transfer everything back to the sauce pan.
- Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly for no more than 3 minutes. Do not allow mixture to boil.
- Let cool for about one hour then add alcohol, and whipping cream.
- Refrigerate overnight or for up to 3 weeks before serving.

### To serve
- **Thaw frozen egg whites overnight the day before serving.**
- Let the egg whites come to room temperature (~30 min) and [Whip into stiff peaks][3]. **Make sure the bowl is clean!** Transfer to serving bowl.
- Whip the cream into medium-firm peaks. Transfer to serving bowl.
- Pore base into serving bowl and gently combine the egg whites, whipped cream and base with a whisk. Do not over-mix.

Serve in punch glasses with a dusting of nutmeg for a beautiful and frothy holiday drink.

## Rescue tips
There are a lot of things that can go wrong with this recipe.

### When you tempered the eggs did they curdle?
Blender the mixture in batches on high for a minute or two without the vanilla been, cinnamon sticks, or cloves. Usually this will do the trick.

### Forgot to thaw the egg whites?
Pick up a carton of egg whites from your grocery store and use them instead. You need about 400g (1.5 cups) but as little as 250g (1 cup) is fine.

[1]: http://lifehacker.com/whats-the-best-way-to-separate-an-egg-white-from-the-y-476479758
[2]: http://www.wikihow.com/Temper-an-Egg
[3]: http://localfoods.about.com/od/preparationtips/ss/How-To-Whip-Egg-Whites.htm
